---
title: Finding the music in computer science and functional programming
author: Emily Zhang
---

I’m [Emily Zhang](mailto:emzhang@mit.edu), a Masters student at MIT in
the Computer Science department and a student volunteer at ICFP 2016
in Nara, Japan. Despite my innocuous sounding name and title, I’m
actually quite a strange fit for the conference. Here’s my story of
how I ended up at ICFP and a little bit about what I got out of it.
Hopefully my meandering path and disenchantment with the status quo
(web development in this case) will resonate with another student
early on in their career.

I did my undergraduate at MIT studying Computer Science and Music
Theory. I tried my best to be excited about web programming (where all
the money and thus campus recruiting presence was), but eventually
became very frustrated and bored with the field,. I thought it meant I
was a bad computer scientist if I didn’t find joy and solace in web
development, especially if many of my peers around me did. I graduated
and signed a job offer with a nontechnical company, swearing off
“computer science” and “programming”.

At the last minute, I applied for the Masters of Engineering program
to continue working on my undergraduate research in computational
musicology. I worked and continue to work with Myke Cuthbert on
building tools for his [music21](http://web.mit.edu/music21/) library.
I made a pact to myself that I would make a concerted effort to
explore the areas of CS that weren’t web development.

That’s how I became a crypto and security kind of gal.

Then in one of my security classes we learned about Symbolic and
Concolic execution (can you begin to put the pieces of how I ended up
at ICFP yet?), and I was hooked. I thought it was beautiful. I thought
the design wasn’t ad hoc and overly specific to a single application.
Around this time, I also learned of a friend’s research with Adam
Chlipala in his PL&SE group at MIT CSAIL.

The following semester I took Adam Chlipala’s Coq class,
[6.887](https://frap.csail.mit.edu/main). I threw myself into the deep
end there, coming from a background with little theoretical and
mathematical formalism, but I enjoyed myself and I had FUN. I started
toying with the ideas of how I might introduce grammars and
verification of musical structures into my graduate research and
thesis. Ideas had structures that were beautiful and pleasing. This is
what I had been missing by chasing lucrative tech internships, making
buttons the perfect shade of blue.

At ICFP, I attended most of the
[FARM](http://functional-art.org/2016/) talks and workshops. Two demos
that stood out to me were Chris Ford’s
[Klangmeister](http://ctford.github.io/klangmeister/) and Tom Murphy’s
[Vivid Synth](http://vivid-synth.com/), two functional livecoding
synthesizers.

Klangmeister is simple synthesizer that runs in your browser (no need
to install anything!). There are some simple functional paradigms that
make it extremely easy to manipulate and loop sounds and thus create
rhythms and melodies. I thought this demo was particularly cool
because of how light-weight it is. Part of my work in musicology is to
help make music accessible to everyone, and I thought that
Klangmeister does a great a job of that. No need to learn how circuits
work before making music! For musician-programmers who have had to
both learn music theory and also how to code, Klangmeister might seem
like a magic black box. When Chris demoed Klangmeister, I felt for the
first time during ICFP that feeling you get when you look at/hear a
particularly nice piece of art. It was a really nice reminder of  how
applicable and tangible the paradigms of functional programming are.
Functional programmers aren’t just a bunch of people who sit on
theoretically high horses reasoning about type theory.

Unfortunately, I didn’t get to see Tom’s demo of Vivid Synth.
Fortunately, I did get to talk to him beforehand about it and the role
of functional reactive programming in livecoding concerts. Vivid Synth
is a Haskell interface to SuperCollider, a popular and powerful
platform for audio synthesis and algorithmic composition (think the
embodiment of musician-programmers). It’s especially good for
livecoding synthesis, which you can imagine needs to be reactive and
stable.

Basically, Tom puts on livecoding concerts where he make music by
writing Haskell code.

This was another warming reminder of the wonderful properties and
abilities of functional programming. I came to ICFP with a huge bag o’
past experiences, most of which never really had to do with functional
programming. Throughout the course of ICFP, I was able to string
together my favorite parts of my past experiences (music theory,
coding, formal structure, etc.) and find people and projects that
embodied all of them. My discovery of this and my interactions with
people of the community who had already discovered this and acted upon
it were the fulfilling and enjoyable parts of ICFP.

I was able to find this niche thanks to the generous support of SV and
PLMW programs. I encourage any student who has a splattering of
interests and disenchantment with the status quo of CS to seek out
places and projects that combine their interests, maybe it’ll even be
at the next ICFP :) 


